updated deprecation process doc (#36860)
Azure/azure-sdk-for-python: doc/deprecation_process.md

> - For migration instructions, see the [migration guide](https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package).
   
If the last released version was 1.2.3, the version should be 1.2.4.

> ## 1.2.4 (2023-03-31)
>
> ### Other Changes
>
> - This package is no longer being maintained. Use the [azure-mynewpackage](https://pypi.org/project/azure-mynewpackage/) package instead.
> - For migration instructions, see the [migration guide](https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package).

Update the version in the `azure/mypackage/_version.py` file. This file may be called `version.py` if your package is very old.

More information on specifics of versioning can be found at [the bottom of the guide under "More details - Versioning"](#versioning).

## sdk_packaging.toml

- Add `auto_update = false` if not already present to avoid the bot overriding your changes.

## pyproject.toml

- Ensure `ci_enabled = false` is NOT present in pyproject.toml. If it is, remove the line, as this will prevent you from releasing the package.

# Step 2: Resolve all open issues/PRs corresponding to the library.

> If there is a Track 2, provide a link to the new package or an existing migration guide before closing.

Reviewer: Let's not use the "track2" word, we can rephrase the same meaning without it:

```suggestion
If there is a replacement library, provide a link to the new package or an existing migration guide before closing.
```

# Step 3: Create a PR

Create a PR targeting the `main` branch.

Example PR to deprecate azure-cognitiveservices-language-luis [here.](https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-python/pull/36893/files)

## Fix any CI issues

> Wait for the CI to run. Fix any issues related to the PR.

Reviewer: Do we need to fix everything? I could imagine we're deprecating the package, and therefore we don't care about fixing tests or mypy?

Author: no, updating to say they should only fix what's needed for deprecation.

## Update Development Status classifier in setup.py

Update `setup.py` to change the `Development Status` classifier to `Development Status :: 7 - Inactive`.

> **Note: This needs to be your LAST commit on the PR.**

Reviewer: To the point before, maybe we want them to disable most CI?

Author: ah, so update the pyproject.toml to set mypy/pylint to false? I'll see if there's one to skip tests in particular.

Reviewer 2: Updating a package to `inactive` in it's classifiers should disable all the checks that run off `tox`. `pylint`, `lint`, etc.

Changelog and readme verification are always on.

`Inactive` packages are disabled from most CI verification, therefore the CI should be faster and have fewer requirements.

## Post your PR in the Python review channel

> Post your PR in the [review channel for Python](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a4175567f1e154a80ab5b88cbd22ea92f%40thread.skype/Language%2520-%2520Python%2520-%2520Reviews?groupId=3e17dcb0-4257-4a30-b843-77f47f1d4121&tenantId=72f988bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db47) and request a review from the codeowner, as the PR will be blocked from merging until approved by the codeowner.

Reviewer: You assume the codeowner and the person doing the PR are two different people. Are they really? Does it matter if they are the same, since I assume they could approve their own PR?

Author: So would you expect that people post in the review channel even if they are the codeowner? Or should they only post if they aren't the codeowner and need approval?

Because if they are the codeowner, there's nothing stopping them from approving even if they haven't followed the steps exactly. The review in the Python channel would still be helpful for them, in case anything looks wrong.

I can advise that they post in the review channel just to get more eyes on it and make sure they've done things correctly. I can also mention that, if they are not the codeowner and need approval from the codeowner, they can tag the codeowner explicitly in the review post.

Thoughts?

Author: updated!

    Artifacts:
    - name: azure-mypackage    
      safeName: azuremypackage
```

- Add the line `ci_enabled = false` to `azure-mypackage/pyproject.toml`.
- Create a new PR targeting the `main` branch of the repository.
- Post the PR in the [review channel for Python](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a4175567f1e154a80ab5b88cbd22ea92f%40thread.skype/Language%2520-%2520Python%2520-%2520Reviews?groupId=3e17dcb0-4257-4a30-b843-77f47f1d4121&tenantId=72f988bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db47).
- Once the PR has been approved by codeowner, merge.
- You're responsible for fixing any CI issues related to this PR.

Example post-deprecation PR for azure-cognitiveservices-language-luis [here](https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-python/pull/36908).

# Step 6: Update API Documentation

## Remove the entry in the github.io docs

Check for your package in the [azure.github.io docs](https://azure.github.io/azure-sdk-for-python/). If an entry for your package exists, reach out to Scott Beddall (scbedd) to delete the entry with the following information:
 - Mention that you have deprecated your package (`azure-mypackage`) and you want the entry removed from the azure.github.io docs.

>  - Include a link to the package entry in the azure.github.io docs.

Reviewer 2: 👍

  - `ReplaceGuide`: If it exists, link to a migration guide in the following format: `aka.ms/azsdk/<language>/migrate/<library>`. If not, set the value to `NA`.
- Create a PR to push these changes. Checks will run to notify the repo owners to review your commit.
- Once the PR has been approved, merge.

The Microsoft Learn API reference docs for your package will be updated to Legacy on the following Wednesday.

Example of deprecated MS Learn API reference docs for Text Analytics [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/python/api/overview/azure/cognitiveservices-language-textanalytics-readme?view=azure-python-previous).

More detailed instructions on updating the CSV file can be found [here](https://eng.ms/docs/products/azure-developer-experience/develop/sdk-deprecation).

## Update overview/conceptual documentation that points to deprecated packages

TODO: The process for this section is still a WIP. Guidance will be updated here once we have concrete steps.

- These will be on the MS Learn page. You can search in the search bar for mentions of the deprecated packages.

# More details

## Versioning

> The best versioning approach would be to do a [post release](https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#post-releases). However, due to some tooling issues at the moment, the version should be the next beta or the next patch version ([example](https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-for-python/commit/cf3bfed65a65fcbb4b5c93db89a221c2959c5bb4)). Follow these issues for more details https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk/issues/7479 and https://github.com/Azure/azure-sdk-tools/issues/5916.

Reviewer: This is true, but I don't think we should have this in this page

The overall idea is that PyPI does not support an official deprecation logic. We concluded that the best way is:
- Change the classifier as `Inactive`, to showcase in metadata that this package is longer worked on.
- Add a disclaimer on the main Readme file to explain deprecation, and provide a migration guide as necessary.
- Push a new release to PyPI.
- Update the API reference docs to show the deprecated status of the package.

# Step 1: Updates to the package files

Clone the `azure-sdk-for-python` repository and update the following files of your package.

## README.md

A disclaimer should be added directing to a replacement package and migration guide as necessary.
  - The link to the replacement package should be a PyPI link: `https://pypi.org/project/azure-mynewpackage/`.
  - The link to the migration guide should be an `aka.ms` link in the format `https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package`. To create this link, go to [https://aka.ms/](https://aka.ms/).

>   - **NOTE**: While a migration guide should always be written, you may decide to postpone this work based on downloads numbers (found on [pypistats](https://pypistats.org/), [pype.tech](https://www.pepy.tech/), etc.) and internal knowledge of the usage of the package. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - **NOTE**: While a migration guide should always be written, you may decide to postpone this work based on downloads numbers (found on [pypistats](https://pypistats.org/), [pepy.tech](https://www.pepy.tech/), etc.) and internal knowledge of the usage of the package. 
```

Reviewer 3: Also, would we postpone a migration guide or just not write one if the following conditions were true?

Author: Technically, since people may choose to postpone forever, they could never write it. 😄 

But will get clarification and update this to explicitly mention that.

Author: updated to say that writing a migration guide may be skipped.

    > # Microsoft Azure SDK for Python
    >
    > This package is no longer being maintained. Use the [azure-mynewpackage](https://pypi.org/project/azure-mynewpackage/) package instead.

  - If the service has been retired and no replacement package exists.

    > # Microsoft Azure SDK for Python
    >
    > This package is no longer being maintained, as the service has been retired. There is no replacement package for this package.

  - If the Azure service no longer exists, a new non-Azure service has replaced it, and existing customers should be directed to the new service's Rest API docs/repo.

    > # Microsoft Azure SDK for Python
    >
    > This package is no longer being maintained. Please refer to the samples in the [My New Service repo](https://github.com/microsoft/my-new-service/tree/main) instead.
    >
    > For additional support, please open a new issue in the [Issues](https://github.com/microsoft/my-new-service/issues) section of the My New Service repo.

## CHANGELOG.md and _version.py

- Update the version in the `azure/mypackage/_version.py` file to the next patch version. This file may be called `version.py` if your package is very old. For example:

>   - If the last released version was 1.2.3b1, the new version should be 1.2.4.

Reviewer 4: Is this the recommendation for packages that never reached a stable version? For example, what should a package do that has only been in beta? 1.0.0b1 -> 1.0.0b2?

Author: oh good question, will update guidance to mention that they should bump to the next beta in that case.

Post your PR in the [review channel for Python](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a4175567f1e154a80ab5b88cbd22ea92f%40thread.skype/Language%2520-%2520Python%2520-%2520Reviews?groupId=3e17dcb0-4257-4a30-b843-77f47f1d4121&tenantId=72f988bf-86f1-41af-91ab-2d7cd011db47) for verification that all requirements for deprecation have been met. If you are not the codeowner, please explicitly tag the codeowner in the post for approval.

## Merge PR

Once the PR is approved, merge.

# Step 4: Trigger a release 

A release here is the same as usual, triggering the release pipeline of your SDK. More instructions on release can be found at: https://aka.ms/azsdk/release-checklist

**Note: This release DOES NOT need to be done during during release week and can be done any time.**

## Post-Release

Check to make sure that the new version of the package has been released on PyPI.

# Step 5: Create a new PR to remove package from CI

- Remove the package artifact from `mypackage/ci.yml`. More specifically, remove the `name` and corresponding `safeName` lines from under `Artifacts` here:

```
extends:
  parameters:
    Artifacts:
    - name: azure-mypackage    

>       safeName: azuremypackage

Reviewer 3: In this example, if we remove name and safeName, I think we'd get an invalid yaml. Should the entire ci.yml just be deleted in this case?

Author: good point! I would also say we should just delete artifacts since we keep the rest of the files. So it feels inconsistent to delete only the ci.yml. Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: yeah delete artifacts seems good if there is only one package

- Add a disclaimer on the main Readme file to explain deprecation, and provide a migration guide as necessary.
- Push a new release to PyPI.
- Update the API reference docs to show the deprecated status of the package.

# Step 1: Updates to the package files

Clone the `azure-sdk-for-python` repository and update the following files of your package.

## README.md

A disclaimer should be added directing to a replacement package and migration guide as necessary.
  - The link to the replacement package should be a PyPI link: `https://pypi.org/project/azure-mynewpackage/`.
  - The link to the migration guide should be an `aka.ms` link in the format `https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package`. To create this link, go to [https://aka.ms/](https://aka.ms/).
  - **NOTE**: While a migration guide should always be written, you may decide to postpone this work based on downloads numbers (found on [pypistats](https://pypistats.org/), [pype.tech](https://www.pepy.tech/), etc.) and internal knowledge of the usage of the package. 

Replace ALL existing text with a disclaimer in the following format.

  - If a replacement package and migration guide exist.

    ```md

>     # Microsoft Azure SDK for Python

Author: update message to: This package has been deprecated and will no longer be maintained after <EOLDate>. Upgrade to the replacement package, <Replace>, to continue receiving updates. Refer to the migration guide (<ReplaceGuide>) for guidance on upgrading. Refer to our deprecation policy (link) for more details.

As per cross-language deprecation guidance.

Author: TODO: May need to update message to say: wait one year for security and critical bug fixes then deprecate: https://azure.github.io/azure-sdk/policies_support.html

- Create a branch in your local copy of the repo: `> git checkout -b python/azure-mypackage_deprecation`
- Open the `_data/releases/latest/python-packages.csv` file.
  - If using Visual Studio Code, the `Edit CSV` extension may be helpful for editing the file.
- Find the entry for your package and update the following fields.
  - `EOLDate`: Date your package will officially be deprecated in mm/dd/yyyy format. If the SDK deprecation is due to a service retirement, this date should match the service final retirement date.
  - `Support`: Change the value to `deprecated`.
  - `Replace`: If it exists, set the value to the name of the package meant to replace the package being deprecated. If not, set the value to `NA`.
  - `ReplaceGuide`: If it exists, link to a migration guide in the following format: `aka.ms/azsdk/<language>/migrate/<library>`. If not, set the value to `NA`.
- **Note: If you are deprecating multiple packages, please wait until all deprecated packages have been released and update all entries necessary in one PR.**
- Create a PR to push these changes. Checks will run to notify the repo owners to review your commit.

> - If your PR has not been reviewed within a couple of days, please ping Xiang Yan (xiangyan) for a review and include a link to your PR.

Author: Add Ronnie + Wes as backups.

- Create a branch in your local copy of the repo: `> git checkout -b python/azure-mypackage_deprecation`
- Open the `_data/releases/latest/python-packages.csv` file.
  - If using Visual Studio Code, the `Edit CSV` extension may be helpful for editing the file.
- Find the entry for your package and update the following fields.
  - `EOLDate`: Date your package will officially be deprecated in mm/dd/yyyy format. If the SDK deprecation is due to a service retirement, this date should match the service final retirement date.
  - `Support`: Change the value to `deprecated`.
  - `Replace`: If it exists, set the value to the name of the package meant to replace the package being deprecated. If not, set the value to `NA`.
  - `ReplaceGuide`: If it exists, link to a migration guide in the following format: `aka.ms/azsdk/<language>/migrate/<library>`. If not, set the value to `NA`.
- **Note: If you are deprecating multiple packages, please wait until all deprecated packages have been released and update all entries necessary in one PR.**
- Create a PR to push these changes. Checks will run to notify the repo owners to review your commit.

> - Ping Xiang Yan (xiangyan) for a review and include a link to your PR. If he is unavailable, ping Ronnie Geraghty (rgeraghty) or Wes Haggard (wesh).

Author: @ronniegeraghty @weshaggard - As discussed, I'm updating the Python deprecation process doc to list you as backups for reviewing PRs that mark MS Learn SDK docs as deprecated.

Checking that this looks good to you?

Reach out to the Python Azure SDK PM, Rohit Ganguly (rohitganguly), if you have any questions about creating a blog post.

# Step 1: Updates to the package files

Clone the `azure-sdk-for-python` repository and update the following files of your package.

## README.md

A disclaimer should be added indicating end-of-life date (EOLDate) of the package and directing to a replacement package and migration guide as necessary.
  - The EOLDate should be in the format `MM-DD-YYYY`.
    - If there is no replacement package, the package EOLDate should be the service retirement date. This does not necessarily need to be the same as the release date in the CHANGELOG.md, since the package may be deprecated before/after the service is retired.
    - If there is a replacement package (or repo), the EOLDate should be the same as the deprecation release date of the old package in the CHANGELOG.md.
    - Service retirement dates MAY be listed [here](https://aka.ms/servicesretirementworkbook), where retiring feature says 'Entire service'.
  - The link to the replacement package should be a PyPI link: `https://pypi.org/project/azure-mynewpackage/`.

>   - The link to the migration guide should be an `aka.ms` link in the format `https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package`. To create this link, go to [https://aka.ms/](https://aka.ms/).

Reviewer: We have a tutorial page on how to create aka.ms that looks consistent from a package to another. @weshaggard would have the link to it. I'm afraid if we just tell people to straight go to aka.ms, link would look inconsistent. At the very least, we should suggest a syntax like aka.ms/azsdk/deprecation/packagename or something like that

Author: This is the syntax that we've used so far: https://aka.ms/azsdk/python/migrate/my-new-package`

But I'll try to find the link to the tutorial.

Author: updated!
